                   COMPLETENESS IN MODAL LOGIC


                                    JORDAN HEBERT


        Abstract. In this paper we use canonical models to prove strong complete-
        ness for several normal modal logics. In particular, we show that a variety of
        normal modal logics, including S4 and S5, are each strongly complete with
        respect to a unique class of frames. Such completeness results are possible
        because the axioms of these normal modal logics, p → ♦p, p → ♦p, and
        ♦♦p → ♦p, define the classes of reflexive, symmetric, and transitive frames,
        respectively.




                                        Contents
  1. Introduction                                                                         1
  2. Preliminaries                                                                        2
  3. The Road to Completeness                                                             5
  4. Completeness Results                                                                10
  Acknowledgments                                                                        12
  References                                                                             12



                                    1. Introduction
   Modal logic is a type of propositional logic that uses the modal operators  and
♦ to express information about the internal features of relational structures. A
certain class of modal logics called normal modal logics has been of great interest
to philosophers and logicians historically. Normal modal logics are collections of
well-formed modal formulas that contain the axioms (p → q) → (p → q)
and p → ¬♦¬p and are closed under modus ponens, uniform substitution, and
generalization.
   One of the most important developments in modal logic concerned providing
these logics with a relational semantics–mathematical structures like models and
frames, as well as satisfaction and validity of modal formulas [1, p. 41]. Using
these tools, which were developed around the 1960s, elegant completeness results
were achieved for a variety of normal modal logics [1, p. 42][2]. Completeness, a
concept perhaps best known from its usage in first-order logic, guarantees that true
statements in a logic can also be deduced in that logic, and is thus an important
means of characterizing the limits of a logic.
   In this paper we prove a variety of these completeness results using canonical
models. Canonical models are a special kind of model for which normal modal logics
are always strongly complete. The lesson is not, however, that any normal modal
logic has a substantive strong completeness proof. Instead, the normal modal logics
that we discuss have canonical model completeness proofs because their axioms
                                              1
2                                 JORDAN HEBERT


define frames with relations specifiable in first-order logic: reflexivity, symmetry,
and transitivity.
   This paper assumes knowledge of basic propositional and first-order logic, but no
prior knowledge of modal logic. For a more detailed and comprehensive exposition
of modal logic, including completeness, see [1]. For a discussion of normal modal
logics and completeness only, see [3].

                                 2. Preliminaries
   In this section, we provide the primary definitions and results we will need to
develop our completeness theorems. In particular, we aim to characterize the modal
language, the procedure for generating modal formulas, and the relational struc-
tures that will allow us to talk about the truth and validity of modal formulas. We
also introduce the concept of a modal logic, a collection of modal formulas that is
in some sense self-contained. Next, we offer a more intuitive discussion of modal
logics. At the end of this section, we discuss a few definitions and proofs common
in propositional logic that deal with consistent sets of formulas–a key aspect of the
canonical models that we will introduce later.
   We begin with several definitions outlining the fundamentals of modal logic.
Definition 2.1 (Basic Modal Language). The basic modal language contains a
collection of propositional variables (p, q, r . . . ) as well as several symbols from
propositional logic: the constant symbol ⊥, or ‘false’, the negation symbol ¬, and
the logical ‘or’ connective ∨. The distinctive addition to the modal language is the
unary modal operator ♦ (called ‘diamond’).
Definition 2.2 (Modal Formulas). A well-formed modal formula (or simply a modal
formula) is any string of symbols in the basic modal language given by the following
(recursively defined) rules:
    (1) Any propositional variable p is a modal formula.
    (2) The constant ⊥ is a modal formula.
    (3) If φ is a modal formula, then ¬φ is a modal formula.
    (4) If φ and ψ are modal formulas, φ ∨ ψ is a modal formula.
    (5) If φ is a modal formula, ♦φ is a modal formula.
    (6) Any finite application of the previous rules is a modal formula.
   From these six requirements we can make a number of abbreviations for common
formulas. Most of these carry over from propositional logic. Let φ and ψ be modal
formulas. Then

 (‘and’ connective ∧)           φ ∧ ψ := ¬(¬φ ∨ ¬ψ).
      (implication →)           φ → ψ := ¬φ ∨ ψ.
 (bi-implication ←→)            φ ←→ ψ := (φ → ψ) ∧ (ψ → φ).
     (the constant >)           > := ¬⊥.
A second modal operator can also be derived from the first.
   (‘box’ operator )           φ := ¬♦¬φ.

  For the remainder of this paper we will use these substitutions.
  It is also worth noting that the unary operators  and ♦ have n-ary analogs.
Many of the results discussed in this paper can be proved using these generalized
                          COMPLETENESS IN MODAL LOGIC                                  3


operators, however, we do not include them since the logics we will discuss feature
only the single-input operators.
  We next turn to a couple of important mathematical structures.
Definition 2.3 (Frames and Models). A frame is a pair F = (W, R) where W is a
nonempty set and R is a binary relation on W . We call W the universe and any
element w in W a world (or a state). We call R the accessibility relation. If two
worlds w and v are related by R, we write Rwv.
    A model is a pair M = (F, V ) where F is a frame and V is a function that assigns
propositional variables to subsets of W . We regard V as a valuation function that
determines whether a propositional variable p is ‘true’ at some world w in W . That
is, p is true at w if w ∈ V (p).
    A collection of frames (or models) is called a class of frames (or models). Often
we talk of the class of frames or models that share a particular relation R.
  The following definition generalizes the notion of truth (or as it is usually de-
noted, satisfaction) at a world to arbitrary modal formulas.
Definition 2.4 (Satisfaction). Let M = (W, R, V ) be a model and let w be a world
in the universe W . If φ is a formula, then φ is satisfied at w (written M, w φ) in
the following ways:
    (1) M, w p if and only if w ∈ V (p).
    (2) M, w ⊥ never.
    (3) M, w ¬φ if and only if not M, w φ.
    (4) M, w φ ∨ ψ if and only if M, w φ or M, w ψ.
    (5) M, w      ♦φ if and only if for some v ∈ W with Rwv we have M, v            φ.
         From items (4) and (5) we may derive satisfaction conditions for ∧ and :
    (6) M, w φ ∧ ψ if and only if M, w φ and M, w ψ.
    (7) M, w φ if and only if for all v ∈ W with Rwv we have M, v φ.
If φ is a formula or set of formulas and M is a model, we say that φ is satisfiable
on M (written M φ) if there exists a world w such that M, w φ.
   Finally, it is worth noting that satisfaction holds for collections of formulas as
well. Thus, if Γ is a collection of modal formulas, we say that M, w         Γ if Γ is
satisfied at w on M.
Definition 2.5 (Validity). Let φ be a formula, F a frame, and w a state in F. We
say that φ is valid at w if φ is satisfied at w for all models whose frame is F (written
F, w φ). If F is a class of frames, then φ is valid on F if φ is valid at w on each
frame F in F (written F, w φ).
   This final piece of notation will be useful for defining completeness. Let S be a
class of models or a class of frames and let Γ∪{φ} be a collection of modal formulas.
We say that Γ S φ (verbally: Γ semantically entails φ on S) if for all structures
S ∈ S and all worlds w in S: S, w Γ implies that S, w φ.
   The following definition allows us to talk about collections of modal formulas
that have certain logically interesting features.
Definition 2.6 (Modal Logics). A modal logic Λ is a set of modal formulas that
contains all propositional tautologies and has the following closure conditions:

        (modus ponens) If φ ∈ Λ and (φ → ψ) ∈ Λ, then ψ ∈ Λ.
4                                       JORDAN HEBERT


    (uniform substitution) If φ ∈ Λ, then any complete substitution of propositional
                           variables of φ is also a formula in Λ.

  If φ ∈ Λ we may say φ is a theorem of Λ or, equivalently, `Λ φ. Otherwise we
have that 0Λ φ.
    Now that we have a basic mathematical perspective on modal logics, it may be
helpful to understand their role more intuitively. Part of the motivation to find
useful modal logics arises from issues in ordinary language. Consider, for instance,
a statement like “it could have rained on Tuesday” (suppose that it did not, in fact,
rain on Tuesday). Depending on the weather where you live at this time of year,
this statement may seem plausible. But what does it mean to say that it could have
rained on Tuesday? Or, a related question: what could the truth conditions of this
statement possibly be? One answer that has been proposed in philosophy is that a
statement of this kind refers to a nearby “possible world,” a hypothetical universe
similar to ours.1 In other words, to say that “it could have rained on Tuesday” is
simply to suggest that there is a close possible world in which it did, in fact, rain
on Tuesday.
    Thus, we can think of one application of modal logic as an attempt to formalize
this kind of analysis of our ordinary language. In this case, ♦p means “it is possible
that p,” or “p is true at some accessible, possible world.” Similarly, p means “it
is necessary that p,” or “p is true at all accessible, possible worlds.” The possibility
and neccessity interpretation of modal logic has also been deployed to shed light
on a variety of philosophical issues, including essential (as opposed to accidental)
properties [6], the character of the laws of nature [7], and proper names and identity
[8]. Other interpretations of modal logic also arise in philosophy and related fields.
For example, modal logics can model states of belief and knowledge, past and future
events, and obligatory and permissible actions [1].
    Returning to the topic at hand, as mentioned in Definition 2.6, modal logics are
particular collections of formulas with helpful deductive relationships. Eventually
we would like to know whether, given a plausible set of axioms in a modal logic,
every satisfiable formula also ends up being deducible in the logic. This would be
a proof of completeness, and it would allow us to use the modal logic (and know
it is well-behaved) in applications, for example, to clarify particular philosophical
questions. The aim of this paper, as discussed previously, will be to show that a
certain class of modal logics are in fact complete.
    Armed with this philosophical perspective on modal logic, we can proceed once
more with the mathematics.
Definition 2.7 (Deducibility). Let Γ ∪ {φ} be a set of modal formulas in some
modal logic Λ. Then φ is Λ-deducible from Γ (written Γ `Λ φ) if `Λ φ or there
exist formulas ψ1 , . . . ψn ∈ Γ where `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → φ.
Definition 2.8 (Consistency). Let Γ be a set of modal formulas in some modal logic
Λ. Then Γ is Λ-consistent if Γ 0Λ ⊥. We say that Γ is Λ-inconsistent otherwise. It
can be shown that Γ is Λ-inconsistent if and only if any formula of Λ is Λ-deducible
from Γ. Likewise, Γ is Λ-inconsistent if and only if there exists a formula φ such
that Γ `Λ φ and Γ `Λ ¬φ.
    1Some philosophers hold that possible worlds are not hypothetical, but just as real as our world
[5]. This view, known as “modal realism,” is of course highly controversial.
                         COMPLETENESS IN MODAL LOGIC                                5


   Given that proofs in modal logic are finite, it also follows by a straightforward
argument, familiar from propositional logic, that Γ is Λ-consistent if and only if
every finite subset of Γ is Λ-consistent.
  A special kind of consistency will be useful for our purposes.
Definition 2.9 (Maximal Consistency). Let Γ be a set of modal formulas in some
modal logic Λ. We say that Γ is maximal Λ-consistent if Γ is Λ-consistent and any
proper superset of Γ is Λ-inconsistent.
   We will also make use of several key features of maximal consistent sets. As the
next two proofs are familiar from propositional logic and lie outside the scope of
this paper, we do not provide the complete arguments.
Proposition 2.10 (Properties of maximal consistent sets). Let Λ be a modal logic
and let Γ be a maximal Λ-consistent set of modal formulas. Then
   (1) Γ is closed under modus ponens: if φ ∈ Γ and φ → ψ ∈ Γ, then ψ ∈ Γ.
   (2) Λ ⊆ Γ.
   (3) for all formulas φ, either φ ∈ Γ or ¬φ ∈ Γ.
   (4) if φ, ψ ∈ Γ, then φ ∧ ψ ∈ Γ.
Proof. These properties are straightforward consequences of maximal consistency.
                                                                              
   The following construction is a useful way to extend a consistent set of formulas
into a maximal consistent set.
Lemma 2.11 (Lindenbaum’s Lemma). Let Λ be a logic and let Σ be a Λ-consistent
set of formulas. Then there exists a maximal Λ-consistent set Σ0 such that Σ ⊆ Σ0 .
Proof. We first enumerate the formulas of our modal language such that each for-
mula has a natural number index like so: φ1 , φ2 , . . . . Then we denote

                                      Σ0 = Σ,
                    (
                     Σn ∪ {φn }       if this set is Λ-consistent
             Σn+1 =
                     Σn ∪ {¬φn }      if Σn ∪ {φn } is not Λ-consistent,
  and                                     [
                                   Σ0 =         Σn .
                                          n≥0
  It can be shown that Σ ⊆ Σ0 and Σ0 is maximal Λ-consistent.                      

                        3. The Road to Completeness
   In this section, we prove the main results we will need to establish the complete-
ness of our modal logics of interest. The key concepts are completeness, normal
modal logics, and the canonical model. Along the way, we also prove a number of
useful lemmas that will allow us to argue for a strong form of completeness using
canonical models.
   We first define soundness and completeness for modal logics.
Definition 3.1 (Soundness). Let S be a class of frames or a class of models. Let
Λ be a modal logic. Then Λ is sound with respect to S if for every formula φ and
structure S ∈ S, if `Λ φ then there is a world w with S, w φ.
6                                 JORDAN HEBERT


   We do not include soundness proofs in our exposition, though it is worth noting
that they can be proved straightfowardly.
Definition 3.2 (Completeness). Let S be a class of frames or a class of models.
Let Λ be a modal logic. Then Λ is strongly complete with respect to S if for any
set of formulas Γ ∪ {φ}, if Γ S φ then Γ `Λ φ.
   We may contrast strong completeness with weak completeness: if Λ is a modal
logic, then Λ is weakly complete on S if S, w φ implies `Λ φ for any formula φ.
   Notice that weak completeness is an exact converse of our soundness definition,
while strong completeness applies to whole sets of formulas at once. As it happens,
all of the normal modal logics investigated in this paper have strong completeness
proofs. Moreover, strong completeness always implies weak completeness, but the
converse does not hold. At the end of this paper, we will briefly discuss an example
of a normal modal logic that is weakly complete, but not strongly complete.
  This next proposition aligns consistency with completeness, a useful connection
when one is working with logics. We will use this result directly in our completeness
proofs.
Proposition 3.3. Let S be a class of frames or a class of models. Let Λ be a
modal logic. Then Λ is strongly complete with respect to S if and only if for every
Λ-consistent set of formulas Γ there is a structure S ∈ S and a world w such that
S, w Γ.
Proof. For the right to left direction, we prove the contrapositive. Thus, we assume
that Λ is not strongly complete with respect to S. Then there exists a set of formulas
Γ ∪ {φ} where Γ S φ but Γ 0Λ φ. Since Γ 0Λ φ, it follows immediately that Γ
is Λ-consistent (else every formula would be deducible from Γ). By extension,
Γ ∪ {¬φ} must also be Λ-consistent, since Γ ∪ {¬φ} `Λ ¬φ but Γ ∪ {¬φ} 0Λ φ.
However, Γ ∪ {¬φ} cannot be satisfiable on any S ∈ S. For suppose otherwise.
Then there exists a structure S and a world w with S, w Γ ∪ {¬φ}, and it follows
that S, w      φ and S, w     ¬φ, which is impossible. Therefore, Γ ∪ {¬φ} is a Λ-
consistent set that is not satisfiable on any structure S ∈ S, and so we have shown
the contrapositive.
   For the left to right direction, we let Γ ∪ {φ} be a Λ-consistent set of formulas
and assume that there is no structure S ∈ S and world w with S, w Γ ∪ {φ}. It
follows that Λ is not strongly complete with respect to S. For suppose otherwise.
Since Γ ∪ {φ} is Λ-consistent, Γ 0Λ ¬φ. By the strong completeness of Λ, Γ 1S ¬φ,
and so there exists a structure S and world w where S, w Γ but not S, w ¬φ.
Then S, w φ, and so S, w Γ ∪ {φ}. But this contradicts the fact that Γ ∪ {φ}
is not satisfiable on any structure S ∈ S. Therefore, Λ is not strongly complete on
S, and this again proves the contrapositive.                                        

    We now turn to a particular kind of modal logic.
Definition 3.4 (Normal Modal Logics). A normal modal logic Λ is a modal logic
that contains

                 (K)        (p → q) → (p → q)
                         as a formula and the closure condition
     (Generalization)       If `Λ φ then `Λ φ.
                           COMPLETENESS IN MODAL LOGIC                                7




   Normal modal logics have a number of nice features which enable them to contain
plausible modal axioms and have simple completeness proofs. We demonstrate one
such feature that will be used later on.
Lemma 3.5. Let Λ be a normal modal logic and let ψ1 , . . . , ψn , φ be a collection of
modal formulas in Λ where `Λ (ψ1 ∧· · ·∧ψn ) → φ. Then `Λ (ψ1 ∧· · ·∧ψn ) → φ.
Proof. We proceed by induction. For the base case, we assume `Λ ψ1 → φ. By
generalization, `Λ (ψ1 → φ), and by the K axiom, `Λ (ψ1 → φ) → (ψ1 → φ).
By modus ponens, `Λ ψ1 → φ, and this completes the base case.
  Next, fix n ∈ N and let A1 , . . . , An , B ∈ Λ be modal formulas. For the inductive
hypothesis, assume that
          if `Λ (A1 ∧ · · · ∧ An ) → B, then `Λ (A1 ∧ · · · ∧ An ) → B.
  Now, let ψ1 , . . . , ψn , ψn+1 , φ be any collection of modal formulas in Λ with
                            `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ∧ ψn+1 ) → φ.
By uniform substitution into the propositional tautology
                            (p ∧ q → r) → (p → (q → r)),
we have
          `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ∧ ψn+1 → φ) → (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → (ψn+1 → φ).
By modus ponens,
                       `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → (ψn+1 → φ).
Applying the inductive hypothesis, we have
                      `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → (ψn+1 → φ).
Using the K axiom,
                          `Λ (ψn+1 → φ) → (ψn+1 → φ).
By propositional logic,
                      `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → (ψn+1 → φ).
Finally, by uniform substitution into the propositional tautology
                             (p → (q → r)) → (p ∧ q → r)
and modus ponens,
                       `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ∧ ψn+1 ) → φ,
and this completes the induction.                                                     
   We next introduce the canonical model, a type of model that will be useful for
several completeness arguments.
Definition 3.6 (Canonical Models). We associate a canonical model
                                 MΛ = (W Λ , RΛ , V Λ )
with a normal modal logic Λ. In particular, we define
    (1) W Λ as the set of all maximal Λ-consistent sets,
    (2) RΛ as the relation RΛ wv if for all formulas ψ, if ψ ∈ v then ♦ψ ∈ w, and
    (3) V Λ as the valuation function V Λ (p) = {w ∈ W Λ | p ∈ w}.
8                                  JORDAN HEBERT


  The frame on which the canonical model is based, FΛ = (W Λ , RΛ ), is called the
canonical frame.
   The canonical model is the primary tool that will enable us to generate complete-
ness proofs for a variety of normal modal logics. However, we first need to show
that any consistent set of formulas can be satisfied in some world in the canonical
model. This requires a number of important lemmas. The next lemma allows us
to use the  operator in the context of the relation RΛ . The two lemmas after
together show that a maximal consistent world will always exist that can satisfy a
consistent set of formulas.
Lemma 3.7. Let Λ be a normal modal logic. Then RΛ wv if and only if for all
formulas ψ, if ψ ∈ w, then ψ ∈ v.
Proof. For the forwards direction, suppose that RΛ wv and ψ ∈        / v. Since v is
maximal Λ-consistent, by Proposition 2.10 ¬ψ ∈ v. Since RΛ wv, ♦¬ψ ∈ w. By
the Λ-consistency of w, ¬♦¬ψ ∈  / w. By substitution, ψ ∈  / w, and this proves the
contrapositive.
   For the backwards direction, suppose that for all formulas ψ, if ψ ∈ w, then ψ ∈
v. Suppose as well that ♦ψ ∈ / w. Since w is maximal Λ-consistent, by Proposition
2.10 ¬♦ψ ∈ w. By substitution, ¬¬¬ψ ∈ w, and so ¬ψ ∈ w. Hence by our
initial assumption ¬ψ ∈ v. Since v is Λ-consistent, ψ ∈    / v, and this proves the
contrapositive once more.                                                          
Lemma 3.8 (Existence Lemma). Let Λ be a normal modal logic, let w be a world
in W Λ , and let φ be an arbitrary modal formula. If ♦φ ∈ w, then there exists a
world v in W Λ such that RΛ wv and φ ∈ v.
Proof. Say ♦φ ∈ w. Let v − be a set of modal formulas with
                             v − = {φ} ∪ {ψ | ψ ∈ w}.
We first show that v − is Λ-consistent. Suppose, for the sake of contradiction,
that v − is Λ-inconsistent. Then v − `Λ ¬φ, and so by Definition 2.7 there exist
ψ1 , . . . , ψn such that
                            `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → ¬φ.
By generalization,
                           `Λ ((ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → ¬φ).
Applying the K axiom,
            `Λ ((ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → ¬φ) → ((ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → ¬φ).
By modus ponens,
                             `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → ¬φ.
   Next, note that (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) is a propositional tautology.
Hence by Lemma 3.5 we have `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ). By
propositional logic, `Λ (ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ) → ¬φ.
   Now, since ψ1 , . . . ψn ∈ w and w is a maximal Λ-consistent set, by Proposition
2.10 we have ψ1 ∧ · · · ∧ ψn ∈ w. Once more by Proposition 2.10, ¬φ ∈ w, and
so by substitution we have ¬♦φ ∈ w. But this contradicts the fact that ♦φ ∈ w
and w is Λ-consistent. Thus v − must be Λ-consistent.
   Finally, by Lindenbaum’s Lemma, there exists a maximal Λ-consistent set v such
that v − ⊆ v ∈ W Λ . By the construction of v, for any formula ψ, if ψ ∈ w, then
ψ ∈ v. Therefore, by Lemma 3.7, RΛ wv. Moreover, since φ ∈ v − , φ ∈ v.               
                          COMPLETENESS IN MODAL LOGIC                                9


Lemma 3.9 (Truth Lemma). Let Λ be a normal modal logic and let φ be an
arbitrary modal formula. Then MΛ , w φ if and only if φ ∈ w.

Proof. We proceed by induction on the degree of φ. That is, we prove the bi-
implication holds for an arbitrary formula φ by proving it holds for a formula that
contains any number of logical connectives.
    Hence, for the base case, suppose that φ contains no logical connectives. Then
φ is either a propositional variable p or the constant ⊥. Suppose that φ is a
propositional variable p. By the definition of V Λ , MΛ , w p if and only if w ∈ V (p)
if and only if p ∈ w, the equivalence we wanted. Suppose instead that φ is the
constant ⊥. Then MΛ , w ⊥ never, and since w is Λ-consistent, ⊥∈      / w. Thus the
desired bi-implication goes through for the ⊥ constant because neither hypothesis
may hold.
    For the inductive hypothesis, we fix n ∈ N, let A be any formula with at most
n connectives, and suppose that MΛ , w A if and only if A ∈ w. It is also worth
noting that a formula with at most n + 1 connectives takes the form ¬B, B ∧ C,
or ♦B (where B and C each have at most n connectives). It remains to show that
the proof goes through for these formulas.
    Let φ be an arbitrary formula with at most n connectives and consider ¬φ, a
formula with at most n + 1 connectives. By our inductive hypothesis, MΛ , w φ
if and only if φ ∈ w. Thus by the definition of satisfaction, not MΛ , w ¬φ. And
by Proposition 2.10, since φ ∈ w, ¬φ ∈    / w. Therefore the two directions of the
implication obtain as desired, because neither antecedent ever holds.
    Next, take φ ∧ ψ, where ψ also has at most n connectives. By our inductive
hypothesis, MΛ , w φ if and only if φ ∈ w and MΛ , w ψ if and only if ψ ∈ w.
Suppose first that MΛ , w φ ∧ ψ. Then MΛ , w φ and MΛ , w ψ, and it follows
that φ ∈ w and ψ ∈ w. Hence by Proposition 2.10, φ ∧ ψ ∈ w. Suppose instead
that φ ∧ ψ ∈ w. By Proposition 2.10, φ ∈ w and ψ ∈ w. By assumption, therefore,
MΛ , w φ and MΛ , w ψ, and it follows that MΛ , w φ ∧ ψ.
    Finally, take ♦φ. Assume first that MΛ , w ♦φ. Then there exists a world v
such that RΛ wv and MΛ , v φ. By our inductive hypothesis, then, φ ∈ v. Hence
by the definition of RΛ , ♦φ ∈ w. Assume next that ♦φ ∈ w. By the Existence
Lemma, there exists a world v such that RΛ wv and φ ∈ v. By our inductive
hypothesis, then, MΛ , v φ, and so MΛ , w ♦φ.                                       


   Using the previous lemmas, we may easily prove the canonical model theorem, an
interesting result in its own right that we will adjust later to get our completeness
proofs.

Theorem 3.10 (Canonical Model Theorem). Let Λ be a normal modal logic. Then
Λ is strongly complete with respect to its canonical model MΛ .

Proof. Let Σ be an arbitrary Λ-consistent set of formulas. By Lindenbaum’s Lemma
there exists a maximal Λ-consistent set of formulas Σ0 such that Σ ⊆ Σ0 . Note
that Σ0 is thus a world in the canonical model MΛ . Hence by the Truth Lemma,
MΛ , Σ0 Σ. Therefore, by Proposition 3.3, Λ is strongly complete with respect to
MΛ .                                                                           
10                                 JORDAN HEBERT


   The Canonical Model Theorem only tells us that every normal modal logic is
strongly complete on a single, contrived structure, its canonical model. The the-
orem therefore does not immediately yield the interesting strong completeness re-
sults we are looking for. However, using the implications of the Canonical Model
Theorem together with Proposition 3.3, we will prove that certain normal modal
logics are strongly complete on whole classes of frames–in ways that have surprising
connections to first-order logic.

                            4. Completeness Results
     We now provide completeness proofs for several normal modal logics.
Definition 4.1. First, we present a few axioms in the basic modal language.
    (T) p → ♦p.
    (B) p → ♦p.
     (4) ♦♦p → ♦p.
    These axioms have been used often throughout the development of modal logic.
Part of the motivation for their use is that they appear plausible under the inter-
pretation of modal logic according to which ♦p means “possibly p” and p means
“necessarily p” [1]. Hence the axiom T, for example, simply says “if p is true, then
it is possible that p,” which seems like a rather reasonable principle. Similarly, B
says “if p is true, then it is necessarily possible that p” which again seems likely
to be true about possibility and necessity. The 4 axiom, however, seems somewhat
harder to translate, and much less evaluate, using this method (“if it is possible that
p is possible, then p is possible?”). This is partly why the mathematical perspective
is helpful in parsing these axioms–it enables us to see whether they create logics
that are clean and useful, without requiring an ordinary language interpretation.
    That aside, it is also worth noting that if a normal modal logic Γ contains no
other formulas besides K, we may call Γ the normal modal logic. If a normal modal
logic Λ contains only K and, for example, the T axiom, we may call Λ the logic
generated (or axiomatized) by T.
Definition 4.2. We next define a number of normal modal logics using combina-
tions of the axioms:
    (1) K is the normal modal logic.
    (2) KT is the logic generated by the T axiom.
    (3) KB is the logic generated by the B axiom.
    (4) K4 is the logic generated by the 4 axiom.
    (5) S4 is the logic generated by the T and 4 axioms.
    (6) S5 is the logic generated by the T, B, and 4 axioms.
We will show that each of these logics is strongly complete with respect to a unique
class of frames.
  The work we have done so far allows us to take care of the logic K fairly easily.
For clarity, we reinterpret the Canonical Model Theorem as a new lemma.
Lemma 4.3. Let Λ be a normal modal logic and let Γ be a Λ-consistent set of
modal formulas. Then there exists a maximal Λ-consistent set of formulas Γ0 such
that MΛ , Γ0 Γ.
Proof. Contained in the proof of the Canonical Model Theorem.                        
                         COMPLETENESS IN MODAL LOGIC                               11


Theorem 4.4 (Completeness of K). The normal modal logic K is strongly complete
with respect to the class of all frames.
Proof. Let Γ be a K-consistent set of modal formulas. We need only find any model
that can satisfy Γ. By Lemma 4.3, MK , Γ0      Γ, and so by Proposition 3.3, K is
strongly complete on the class of all frames.                                  
   With the strong completeness of K done, we arrive at a crucial lemma. This
will enable us to reinterpret the axioms named in Definition 4.1 as properties of the
relations of canonical frames.
Lemma 4.5. If a normal modal logic ΛT contains the axiom T, then the relation
RΛT on its canonical frame FΛT must be reflexive. An analogous result holds for
the B axiom and symmetry, and the 4 axiom and transitivity.
Proof. Let ΛT be a normal modal logic containing the T axiom. Let w be an
arbitrary world in the canonical model of ΛT and let φ be a modal formula in w.
Since w is a maximal ΛT -consistent set, it contains the axioms of the logic ΛT .
Hence φ → ♦φ ∈ w (the T axiom). By the closure of modus ponens on maximal
consistent sets, ♦φ ∈ w, and so RΛT ww. That is, RΛT is a reflexive relation.
   Next, let ΛB be a normal modal logic containing the B axiom. Let w and v
be arbitrary worlds in the canonical model of ΛB and let φ be a modal formula
in w. Suppose as well that RΛB wv. Since w is a maximal ΛB -consistent set,
φ → ♦φ ∈ w (the B axiom), and by modus ponens, ♦φ ∈ w. By Lemma 3.7,
♦φ ∈ v, and so RΛB vw. Hence RΛB is a symmetric relation.
   Finally, let Λ4 be a normal modal logic containing the 4 axiom. Let w, v, and z
be arbitrary worlds in the canonical model of Λ4 where RΛ4 wv and RΛ4 vz. Let φ
be a modal formula with φ ∈ z. By the fact that RΛ4 vz, ♦φ ∈ v. By the fact that
RΛ4 wv, ♦♦φ ∈ w. Since w is a maximal Λ4 -consistent set, ♦♦φ → ♦φ ∈ w (the 4
axiom), and by modus ponens, ♦φ ∈ w. Hence RΛ4 wz, and so RΛ4 is a transitive
relation.                                                                       
Theorem 4.6. The normal modal logics KT, KB, K4, S4, and S5 are strongly
complete with respect to the classes of frames listed below.
Proof. All of these results can be proved using a similar argument. We prove strong
completeness for S5 as an example and then include the rest of the results in the
table below.
   Let Γ be an S5-consistent set of modal formulas. By Lemma 4.3, there exists a
maximal S5-consistent set of formulas Γ0 where MS5 , Γ0 Γ. Since S5 contains the
axioms T , B, and 4, by Lemma 4.5, RS5 is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive–an
equivalence relation. Therefore, by Proposition 3.3, S5 is strongly complete with
respect to the class of all frames with an equivalence relation.
   Parallel arguments will reveal the following completeness results:
   KT         Strongly complete on the class of reflexive frames
   KB         Strongly complete on the class of symmetric frames
   K4         Strongly complete on the class of transitive frames
    S4        Strongly complete on the class of reflexive and transitive frames
                                                                                 
   At this point, one might suspect that any normal modal logic is strongly complete
with respect to a particular class of frames. However, this is false. The normal
12                                        JORDAN HEBERT


modal logics we have discussed have these completeness proofs because they share
an attractive feature: their additional axioms ‘define’ classes of frames in a precise
sense. We explain in the following definition.
Definition 4.7 (Frame Definability). Let F be a class of frames and let φ be a
modal formula. Then φ defines F if for any frame F, F is in F if and only if F, w φ.
     Hence we may show that, for instance, the axiom T defines reflexivity.
Theorem 4.8. Let F be a frame. Then F, w                   p → ♦p if and only if F |= ∀x Rxx
(i.e. F is reflexive).
Proof. For the right to left direction, let F be a reflexive frame. Let p be a propo-
sitional variable, let V be a valuation, and let w be a world where (F, V ), w p.
Since the relation on F is reflexive, w is accessible from w. Thus, since p holds
at w, ♦p holds at w (there exists an accessible world, w, where p holds). Hence
F, w p → ♦p.
   For the left to right direction, we prove the contrapositive. Let F be a frame
whose relation is not reflexive. Then there exists a world w that is not accessible
from itself. Let p be a propositional variable and let V (p) = {w}. In other words,
p is only satisfied at w. And since w is not accessible from itself, no world that is
accessible from w can satisfy p, and so (F, V ), w 1 ♦p. It follows that (F, V ), w 1
p → ♦p.                                                                             
   A key observation here is that the axiom T corresponds to a statement in first
order logic, reflexivity, and the analogous claims can be made about the B and 4
axioms. This is not the case for every modal formula, however. For example, the
formula (p → p) → p has no equivalent formula in first-order logic. Hence
(p → p) → p cannot define any class of frames, and so canonical models
cannot be used to prove completeness for a normal modal logic augmented with
(p → p) → p as an axiom. As it turns out, the normal modal logic with the
aforementioned axiom, which we may call KL, is not strongly complete on any
class of frames [1, p.211]. For what it’s worth, however, KL is weakly complete on
the class of finite transitive trees.2

                                      Acknowledgments
   I would like to thank my mentor, Gabriela Pinto, for permitting me to research an
area of logic unfamiliar to us both, and for patiently answering my many questions.
I would also like to thank Professor Denis Hirschfeldt, who reviewed my paper,
caught many errors, and offered excellent suggestions.

                                           References
[1] Patrick Blackburn, Maarten de Rijke, and Yde Venema. Modal Logic. Cambridge University
    Press. 2001.
[2] Saul Kripke. A Completeness Theorem in Modal Logic. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol.
    24, no. 1, 1959, pp 1-14. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2964568
[3] Marek Sergot. Normal Modal Logics (Syntactic Characterizations). Lecture Notes, 499 Modal
    and Temporal Logic. Imperial College, London. 2007. https://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~mjs/
    teaching/ModalTemporal499/version2007/Normal_499_v0708.pdf

     2See section 4.8 of [1] for methods involved in this proof.
                             COMPLETENESS IN MODAL LOGIC                                     13


[4] C.C. Chang and H. Jerome Keisler. Model Theory. North-Holland Publishing Company. 1973.

   Further Reading in Philosophy

[5] David Lewis. On the Plurality of Worlds. Blackwell Publishing. 1986.
[6] Kit Fine. Essence and Modality: The Second Philosophical Perspectives Lecture. Philosophical
    Perspectives, vol. 8 1994, pp 1-16. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2214160
[7] Helen Beebee. The Non-Governing Conception of Laws of Nature. Philosophy and Phenomeno-
    logical Research, vol. 61, no. 3, 2000, pp571-594. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2653613
[8] Saul Kripke. Naming and Necessity. Harvard University Press. 1980.
